---
title: Termination
description: Terminating a Lingua Franca execution.
---

import {
  LanguageSelector,
  NoSelectorTargetCodeBlock,
  ShowIf,
  ShowIfs,
  ShowOnly,
} from "@site/src/components/LinguaFrancaMultiTargetUtils";

<LanguageSelector c cpp py rs ts />

## Shutdown Reactions

There are several mechanisms for terminating a Lingua Franca in an orderly
fashion. All of these mechanisms result in a **final tag** at which any reaction
that declares `shutdown` as a trigger will be invoked (recall that a **tag** is
a tuple (**logical time**, **microstep**)). Other reactions may also be invoked
at this final tag, and the order in which reactions are invoked will be
constrained by the normal precedence rules.

If a reaction triggered by `shutdown` produces outputs, then downstream reactors
will also be invoked at the final tag. If the reaction schedules any actions by
calling `schedule()`, those will be ignored. In fact, any event after the final
tag will be ignored. After the completion of the final tag, the program will
exit.

There are four ways to terminate a program:

- **Timeout**: The program specifies the last logical time at which reactions
  should be triggered.
- **Starvation**: At the conclusion of some tag, there are no events in the
  event queue at future tags.
- **Stop request**: Some reaction requests that the program terminate.
- **External signal**: Program is terminated externally using operating services
  like control-C or `kill`.

We address each of these in turn.

## Timeout

The [target property `timeout`](../introduction.md#timeout) specifies the last
logical time at which reactions should be triggered. The last invocation of
reactions will be at tag (`timeout`, 0).

There is a significant subtlety when using
[physical connections](../writing-reactors/composing-reactors.mdx#physical-connections),
which are connections using the syntax `~>`. Such connections specify that the
tag at the receiving end will be based on the physical time at which the message
is received. If the tag assigned at the receiving end is greater than the final
tag, then the message is lost. Hence, **messages sent near the `timeout` time
are likely to be lost!**

## Starvation

If a Lingua Franca program has no
[physical actions](../writing-reactors/actions.mdx#physical-actions), and if at
any time during execution there are no future events waiting to be processed,
then there is no possibility for any more reactions to occur and the program
will exit. This situation is called **starvation**. If there is a **timer**
anywhere in the program with a period, then this condition never occurs.

One subtlety is that reactions triggered by `shutdown` will be invoked one
microstep later than the last tag at which there was an event. They cannot be
invoked at the same tag because it is only after that last tag has completed
that the runtime system can be sure that there are no future events. It would
not be correct to trigger the `shutdown` reactions at that point because it
would be impossible to respect the required reaction ordering.

<ShowOnly c py ts>

Starvation termination is not currently implemented for federated execution. You
will need to use one of the other mechanisms to terminate a federated program.

</ShowOnly>

## Stop Request

If a reaction calls the built-in `request_stop()` function, then it is
requesting that the program cease execution as soon as possible. This cessation
will normally occur in the next microstep. The current tag will be completed as
normal. Then the tag will be advanced by one microstep, and reactions triggered
by `shutdown` will be executed, along with any other reactions with triggers at
that tag, with all reactions executed in precedence order.

<ShowOnly c py ts>

In a federated execution, things are more complicated. In general, it is not
possible to cease execution in the next microstep because this would mean that
every federate has a communication channel to every other with delay equal to
one microstep. This does not create a causality loop, but it means that all
federates have to advance time in lockstep, which creates a global barrier
synchronization that would likely kill performance. It would also make
decentralized coordination impossible because the safe-to-process (STP)
threshold for all federates would diverge to infinity.

For **centralized coordination**, when a reaction in a federate calls
`request_stop()`, the federate sends a **STOP_REQUEST** message to the RTI with
its current timestamp _t_ as a payload and completes execution of any other
reactions triggered at the current tag. It then blocks, waiting for a
**STOP_GRANTED** message with a timestamp payload _s_. If _s_ > _t_, then it
sets `timeout` = _s_ and continues executing, using the timeout mechanism (see
above) to stop. If _s_ = _t_, then schedules the shutdown phase to occur one
microstep later, as in the unfederated case.

When the RTI receives a **STOP_REQUEST** message from a federate, it forwards it
to all other federates and waits for a reply from all. Each reply will have a
timestamp payload. The RTI chooses _s_, the largest of these timestamps, and
sends a **STOP_GRANTED** message to all federates with payload _s_.

When a federate receives a **STOP_REQUEST** message, it replies with its current
logical time _t_, completes its current tag (if one is progress), and blocks,
waiting for a **STOP_GRANTED** message from the RTI. When it gets the reply with
payload _s_, if _s_ > _t_, then it sets `timeout` = _s_ and continues executing,
using the timeout mechanism (see above) to stop. If _s_ = _t_, then it schedules
the shutdown phase to occur one microstep later, as in the unfederated case.

</ShowOnly>

## External Signal

A control-C or other kill signal to a running Lingua Franca program will cause
execution to stop immediately.

<ShowOnly c py ts>

For federated programs, each federate and the RTI catches external signals to
shut down in an orderly way.

When a federate gets such an external signal (e.g. control-C), it sends a
**RESIGN** message to the RTI and an **EOF** (end of file) on each socket
connection to another federate. It then closes all sockets and shuts down. The
RTI and all other federates should continue running until some other termination
condition occurs.

When the RTI gets such an external signal (e.g. control-C), it broadcasts a
**STOP_REQUEST** message to all federates, waits for their replies (with a
timeout in case the federate or the network has failed), chooses the maximum
timestamp _s_ on the replies, broadcasts a **STOP_GRANTED** message to all
federates with payload _s_, and waits for **LOGICAL_TIME_COMPLETE** messages as
above.

</ShowOnly>
