---
title: Future Proof Package/Import System
description: A future proof package and import system
---

This is a collection of thoughts on the design of a reliable package and import
system that is ready for future applications. At this stage, this page mostly
represents my personal view (Christian Menard). I will also focus on the C++
target here as this is the target I know best. The C target is not a good
example for these considerations as there is a fundamental design issue with the
C target. Since the code generator places all code in a single generated `.c`
file and does things like `#include reactor.c` to avoid the need for Makefiles,
it circumvents many of the issues that come with imports that I will outline
here. It simply ignores file scopes and namespaces altogether.

# The status quo

The current import system is lean and simple. Write `import Bar.lf` in `Foo.lf`
and every reactor defined in `Bar.lf` will be visible in the file scope
`Foo.lf`. `Bar.lf` is looked up simply by scanning the directory `Foo.lf` is
placed in. This works well for the simple programs and tests we have right now,
but does not scale. I identify the following problems:

1. There is no notion of separate namespaces. Every reactor that `Bar.lf`
   defines becomes visible in `Foo.lf`. If both files define a Reactor `Foo`,
   there is a name clash and the import would be ill-formed. There should be a
   mechanism to distinguish the two definitions of `Foo`, such as using fully
   qualified names: `Foo.Foo` and `Bar.Foo`.

2. There is no concept for importing files from a directory structure. It is
   unclear how `Foo.lf` could import `my/lib/Bar.lf`.

3. There is no concept for packages or libraries that can be installed on the
   system. How could we import Reactors from a library that someone else
   provided?

These are the more obvious issues that we have talked about. However, there are
more subtle ones that we haven't been discussed in depth (or at least not in the
context of the import system design discussion). The open question is: What does
importing a LF file actually mean? Obviously, an import should bring Reactors
defined in another files into local scope. But what should happen with the other
structures that are part of an LF file, namely target properties and preambles?
That is not specified and our targets use a best practice approach. But this is
far away from a good design that is scalable and future proof.

## A quick dive into the C++ code generator

Before I discuss the problems with preambles and target properties, I would like
to give you a quick overview of how the C++ code generator works. Consider the
following LF program consisting of two files `Foo.lf` and `Bar.lf`:

```
// Bar.lf

reactor Bar {
 reaction(startup) {=
   // do something bar like
 =}
}
```

```
// Foo.lf

import Bar.lf

reactor Foo {
 bar = new Bar();
 reaction(startup) {=
   // do something foo like
 =}
}
```

Now let us have a look on what the C++ code generator does. It will produce a
file structure like this:

```
CMakeLists.txt
main.cc
Bar/
  Bar.cc
  Bar.hh
Foo/
  Foo.cc
  Foo.hh
```

We can ignore `CMakeLists.txt` and `main.cc` for our discussion here. The former
specifies how the whole program can be build and the latter contains the
`main()` function and some code that is required to get the application up and
running. For each processed `<file>.lf` file, the code generator creates a
directory `<file>`. For each reactor `<reactor>` defined in `<file>.lf`, it will
create `<file>/<reactor>.cc` and `<file>/<reactor>.hh`. The header file declares
a class representing the reactor like this:

```
// Bar/Bar.hh

# pragma once

#include "reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh"

class Bar : public reactor::Reacor {
 private:
  // default actions
  reactor::StartupAction startup {"startup", this};
  reactor::ShutdownAction shutdown {"shutdown", this};

 public:
  /* ... */

 private:
  // reaction bodies
  r0_body();
};
```

The corresponding `Bar/Bar.cc` will look something like this:

```
#include "Bar/Bar.hh"

/* ... */

Bar::r0_body() {
  // do something bar like
}
```

Similarly, `Foo.hh` and `Foo.cc` will be generated. However, since `Foo.lf`
imports `Bar.lf` and instantiated the reactor `Bar` it must be made visible.
This is done by an include directive in the generated code like so:

```
// Foo/Foo.hh
###
# pragma once

#include "reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh"
#include "Bar/Bar.hh"

class Foo : public reactor::Reacor {
 private:
  // default actions
  reactor::StartupAction startup;
  reactor::ShutdownAction shutdown;

  // reactor instances
  Bar bar;
 public:
  /* ... */

 private:
  // reaction bodies
  r0_body();
};
```

## The problem with preambles

The problems with preamble in the context of imports were already discussed in a
[related issue](https://github.com/pulls), but I would like to summarize the
problem here. While the examples above worked nicely even with imports, things
get messy as soon as we introduce a preamble. Let's try this:

```
// Bar.lf

reactor Bar {
 preamble {=
   struct bar_t {
     int x;
     std::string y;
   };

   bar_t bar_func {
     return bar_t(42, "hello")
   }
 =}
 output out:bar_t;
 reaction(startup) -> out {=
   out.set(bar_fuc());
 =}
}
```

```
// Foo.lf

import Bar.lf

reactor Foo
 bar = new Bar();
 reaction(bar.out) {=
   auto& value = bar.out.get();
   std::cout << "Received {" << value->x << ", " << value->y << "}\n";
 =}
}
```

This would be expected to print `Received {32, hello}`. However, before we can
even compile this program, we need to talk about what should happen with the
preamble during code generation and how the import affects it. So where should
the preamble go? The first thing that comes to mind, is to embed it in the
header file `Bar.hh` something like this:

```
// Bar/Bar.hh

# pragma once

#include "reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh"

// preamble
struct bar_t {
  int x;
  std::string y;
};

bar_t bar_func {
  return bar_t(42, "hello")
}

class Bar : public reactor::Reacor {
 /* ... */
};
```

If we embed the preamble like this and compile the program ,then the compiler is
actually happy and processes all `*.cc` files without any complaints. **But**,
there is a huge problem while linking the binary. The linker sees multiple
definitions of `bar_func` and has no idea which one to use. Why is that? Well,
the definition of `bar_func` is contained in a header file. This should never be
done in C/C++! Since includes translate to a plain-text replacement by the
preprocessor, `Bar.cc` will contain the full definition of `bar_func`. As
`Foo.cc` imports `Foo.hh` which imports `Bar.hh`, also Foo.cc will contain the
full definition. And since `main.cc` also has to include `Foo.hh`, `main.cc`
will also contain the full definition of `bar_func`. So we have multiple
definitions of the same function and the linker rightfully reports this as an
error.

So what should we do? We could place the preamble in `Bar.cc` instead. This
ensures that only `Bar.cc` sees the definition of `bar_func`. But then the
compiler complains. Neither `Bar.hh` nor `Foo.hh` see type declaration of
`bar_t`. Note that there is a dependency of `Foo.lf` on the preamble in
`Bar.lf`. The import system should somehow take care of this dependency! Also
note that this has not appeared as a problem in C as the code generator places
everything in the same compilation unit. `Foo` will see the preamble of `Bar` as
long as `Foo` is generated before `Bar`.

But how to solve it for C++ where the code is split in multiple compilation
units (which really should be happening in C as well)? What we do at the moment
is annotating the preamble with `private` and `public` keywords. This helps to
split the preamble up and decide what to place in the header and what to place
in the source file. For instance:

```
// Bar.lf

reactor Bar {
 public preamble {=
   struct bar_t {
     int x;
     std::string y;
   };
 =}
 private preamble {=
   bar_t bar_func {
     return bar_t(42, "hello")
   }
 =}
 output out:bar_t;
 reaction(startup) -> out {=
   out.set(bar_fuc());
 =}
}
```

This makes the type `bar_t` visible as part of the public interface of `Bar`.
Both the code generated for `Bar` and the code generated for `Foo` will see the
definition of `bar_t`. This is realized by placing the public preamble in
`Bar.hh` The function `bar_func` is part of `Bar`'s private interface. It is
only visible with the reactor definition of `Bar` and is not propagated by an
import. This is realized by simply placing the private preamble in `Bar.cc`.
This makes the compiler finally happy and when get an executable program private
and public preambles provide a mechanism to define what is propagated on an
import and what is not. I think this is an important distinction even in
languages other than C/C++ that do not have this weird separation of source and
header file.

I am sorry for this lengthy diversion into things that happened in the past
where we actually want to talk about how things should work in the future.
However, understanding this issue is important and when talking about other
solutions we should not forget that it exists.

## The problem with target properties

It is also not well-defined what should happen with target properties when
importing a `.lf` file. Apparently the common practice is simply ignoring the
existence of other target declarations and only considering the target
declaration of the `.lf` that contains the main reactor. I think this works
reasonably well for our small programs. But it will cause problems when either
programs become larger or we introduce new target properties where it is unclear
what piece of code they reference. Let us have a look at the
[existing target properties for C++](https://github.com/lf-lang/lingua-franca/wiki/Writing-Reactors-in-Cpp#the-c-target-declaration).
How should those different properties be handled on an import? Which scope do
they actually apply to? We haven't really talked about this.

`fast`, `keepalive`, `threads` and `timeout` are easy. They apply to the main
reactor. Since we do not import main reactors from other files, it is clear that
we really want to use the properties defined in the main compilation unit. So
our current strategy works in this case. Although there are still some
subtleties. For instance, if a library file defines `keepalive=true` and
`fast=false` because it uses physical actions, should any file importing this
library file be allowed to override these properties. Probably not, because it
doesn't make sense if physical actions are involved. But a careless user of the
library might not be aware of that. So maybe it isn't that clear after all.

`build-type`, `cmake-include`, `compile`, `logging` and `no-runtime-validation`
influence how the application is build. They are used for generating the
`CMakeLists.txt` file. So their is quite clear: they apply to the whole
compilation of the given application. Again it is a simple solution to only
consider the target properties of the file containing the main reactor since
this can be considered the file that 'drives' the compilation. But what if an
imported `.lf` relies on an external library and uses the `cmake-include`
property to tell CMake to look this library up, make the library header files
visible and link our generated code to that library (fortunately this can be
done with 2 lines in CMake). Should this target property really be ignored by
our import? Probably not, because it will lead to compile errors if the author
of the main `.lf` file does not configure `cmake-include` properly. So there
should be some kind of merging mechanism for `cmake-include`. Should this be
done for the other properties as well? I am not sure and I actually don't know
how the merging would work.

So this raises a lot of questions that we currently have no answer to. I believe
we need to find answers for these questions in order to create a well working
import and package system. This gets only more complicated when we add more
properties such as the proposed `files` directive. We should really consider
what properties actually apply to and if they influence the way imports work.

### The work in progress

To be continued... I want to describe here what is happening on the `new_import`
and the (potential) problems this brings.

### Possible solutions

To be continued... I would like to show a few possible solutions that have come
to mind and that we discussed already.

## Concrete proposal

With the risk of overlooking some of the issues discussed above, I'd like to
outline a concrete proposal. To me, at least, it is easier to reason about these
issues in a context with a few more constraints. Hopefully, this can serve as a
starting point that we can tweak/adjust as needed. Note: this proposal borrows
from the previous proposal written by Soroush. Based on my experience with
Xtext, I have confidence that what is described below is feasible to implement.

### Import/export

1. One LF file can contain multiple reactor definitions.
2. There can be at most one main reactor per file.
3. Any reactor class defined outside of the current file has to be imported
   explicitly.
4. The visibility of a reactor class can be limited using a modifier in the
   class definition.

- _Should the default visibility be public or private? I have no strong
  preference either way._

5. An `import` statement **must** specify which reactor classes to import. This
   is necessary because if we populate a global scope using the `uriImport`
   mechanism, the local scope provider needs to know which definition to link to
   if there happen to exist multiple among the set of included files. We could
   _potentially_ relax this constraint and only report the situation where we
   know for a fact that there is ambiguity and needs to be resolved by making
   the imports explicit. We could also deprecate the use of unqualified imports
   (the original syntax), therefore allow it but warn that it might not work as
   expected.
6. An LF file in an `import` statement is specified by a path relative to the
   directory of the file in which the `import` statement occurs or relative to a
   series of directories in a wider search path.

- _Eclipse uses `.project` files to identify the root of a project; we can look
  for that._
- _We can look for our own kind of manifest files as well. These can list
  additional locations to search. This is compatible with the idea of developing
  a package system. I personally like this approach better than using an
  environment variable._

7. I personally find fully qualified names excess generality and have never felt
   compelled to use them in Java. IMO, they lead to code that's difficult to
   read and a pain to format. To keep things simple, I suggest we don't support
   them. Instead, we should provide a mechanism for renaming imported reactor
   classes to avoid naming conflicts.
8. _Open question: do we want scope modifiers for imports? It seems that extra
   import statements could be used to increase visibility, so it might not be
   needed._

### Syntax

```
Import := 'import' <ID> <Rename>? (',' <ID> <Rename>?)* 'from' <PATH>

Rename := 'as' <ID>
```

_Note: This syntax could be extended to support packages in addition to paths.
But it doesn't make much sense to have this until we have a package manager and
package registry._

_Current state of the discussion: one unifying syntax vs. different syntax for
references to files and packages._

## Preambles

A preamble allows for the inclusion of verbatim target code that may be
necessary for reactors to function. Currently, there are two scopes in which
preambles can appear: (1) file scope and (2) reactor class scope. Moreover,
there exist visibility modifiers to label preambles `private` or `public`. A
`public` preamble is intended to contain code that is necessary for the use of a
reactor that is in scope. A `private` preamble is intended to contain code that
is necessary for the implementation of a reactor that is in scope. Only the C++
code generator can currently effectively separate these LF scope levels. It
achieves this by putting each reactor class definition in its own file. LF file
scope preambles are currently not supported by the C target, but this appears to
be unintentional and would be easy to fix. Reactor class scope preambles are
supported by the C target, but there is no isolation of scope; the preamble of
one reactor is visible to the one defined after it. To fix this, I see two
options: (1) follow the same approach as `CppGenerator` and output separate
files, which also means that a Makefile has to be generated in order to compile
the result, or (2) leverage block scope within a single file, but this will
become complicated and make the generated C code even less humanly readable.

_We could put aside the problem of name clashes due to the absence of scope
isolation in generated C code and fix this later. For the time being, the
problem can be circumvented using `.h` files._

## Target Properties

1. Each file declares a target.
2. All code in all reactors in the same file must agree with the specified
   target.
3. Additional target properties may be specified.
4. Target properties are not inherited through imports.
5. Any property that needs to be inherited through an import (such as the
   requirement to link against the pthread library) must be specified as a build
   dependency instead.

## Build Dependencies

1. It must be possible to specify build dependencies, such as `files`,
   `sources`, and `protobufs`.
2. We could either allow these definitions to go directly in the `.lf` file, or
   we could decide to specify them in a package description (i.e., separate
   file). We could potentially allow both.
3. Build dependencies are inherited through imports (or from package
   descriptions), and they are never shadowed, always _joined_.

# Unique Reactor Names

The new import system as described above ensures that reactor names within a
single `.lf` file are unique. In case reactors with the same name are imported
from different `.lf` files, the renaming mechanism needs to be used in order to
resolve the name conflict. The same applies if the given `.lf` file defines some
reactors and tries to import other reactors with the same name. For instance,
consider the LF file in Example 1 below. In the scope of this file, three
reactor declarations are visible: `Foo`, `Bar` and `Baz`, although the actual
reactors have the same name `Foo`.

## Examples

Throughout this section, I will be using two LF example programs. Since the
markdown syntax does not provide a simple way to label and refer to code
listings, I figure its easiest to place them here in a central place and refer
to them later by the heading

### Example 1

```
\\ Foo.lf
import Foo as Bar from "Bar.lf"
import Foo as Baz from "Baz.lf"

reactor Foo {
  \\ ...
}
```

### Example 2

```
\\ Baz.lf
reactor Foo {
  \\ ...
}
```

```
\\ Bar.lf
import Foo from "Baz.lf"

reactor Foo {
  foo = new Foo()
  \\ ...
}
```

```
\\ Foo.lf
import Bar from "Bar.lf"
main reactor Foo {
  bar = new Bar()
  \\ ...
}
```

## Unique Reactor Names in Target Code

While the mechanism above effectively ensures uniqueness in a single LF file,
this uniqueness is surprisingly hard to ensure in generated target code. C has
an obvious problem here as it places all generated code in a single file. While
the name conflict in the above code can be solved by generating code for three
reactors named `Bar`, `Baz` and `Foo`, it breaks as soon as another file of the
same LF program uses `import Foo from "Bar.lf"`. Then there would be two
definitions of the reactor `Foo` that cannot be resolved.

Now you would probably expect that splitting the generated code into multiple
files solves the issue, but unfortunately this is not true. If anything, it
makes the problem more subtle. The C++ code generated from Example 1 would
likely look something like this:

```
// Foo.hh
#include <reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh>

#include "Bar.hh"
#include "Baz.hh"

// do the renaming
using Bar = Foo;
using Baz = Foo;

class Foo : public reactor::Reactor {
};
```

This will cause a compile error as there are multiple definitions of `Foo`.
While renaming is possible in C++ with the `using` keyword (`typedef` works as
well), the thing being renamed needs to be already visible in the scope. So
there are multiple definitions of `Foo` as all the files `Bar.hh`, `Baz.hh` and
`Foo.hh` define this class. We need a mechanism to distinguish the different
definitions of `Foo`.

There is even another issue that stems from the fact that the semantics of
imports in LF are different from the include semantics of C++. Consider the code
in Example 2, which is valid LF code. Although `Bar.lf` imports `Foo` and
`Foo.lf` imports from `Bar.lf`, the definition of `Foo` in `Baz.lf` is not
visible in `Foo.lf`. This 'hiding', however, does not easily propagate to the
generated code. In C, there will be an error because both definitions of `Foo`
are placed in the same file. In C++, the different definitions of `Foo` are
placed in different files, but there will still be an error. The generated C++
code would look something like this:

```
\\ Baz.hh
#include <reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh>

class Foo : public reactor::Reactor {
  // ...
};
```

```
\\ Bar.hh
#include <reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh>

#include "Baz.hh"

class Bar : public reactor::Reactor {
  Foo foo;
  // ...
};
```

```
\\ Foo.hh
#include <reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh>

#include "Bar.hh"

class Foo : public reactor::Reactor {
  Bar bar;
  // ...
};
```

This will produce an error due to multiple definitions of `Foo` being visible in
`Foo.hh`. The problem is that any include in `Bar.hh` becomes also visible in
`Foo.hh`. So there is a name clash due to the way the C++ compiler processes
included and that is hard to work around.

## Possible Solutions

In conclusion from the above section, I can say that translating the file based
scoping of reactor names that we have in LF to generated target code is not
trivial. Any sensible solution will need to establish a mechanism to ensure that
any two distinct reactors in LF are also distinct in target code.

### Namespaces

We could introduce some form of a namespace mechanism that allows us to derive
fully-qualified names of reactors. This is the preferred solution for me
(Christian). Note that by 'namespace' I mean any logical organization of
reactors in named groups and not the precise concept of C++ namespaces. In other
languages those logical groups are also referred to as modules or packages. Also
note that it is only important to be able to assign a fully-qualified name to a
reactor, it does not necessarily require that we refer to reactors by their
fully-qualified name in LF code.

#### File based namespaces

In my view, the easiest way to introduce namespaces in LF would be to leverage
file system structure. Everything contained in `Foo.lf` would automatically be
in the namespace `Foo`. So the FQN of a reactor `Foo` defined in `Foo.lf` would
be `Foo.Foo` (or `Foo::Foo`, or some other delimiter). This would solve the name
clashes in both of our examples. For Example 1, the generated code could look
like this:

```
// Foo.hh
#include <reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh>

#include "Bar.hh"
#include "Baz.hh"
namespace Foo {

// do the renaming
using Bar = Bar::Foo;
using Baz = Baz::Foo;

class Foo : public reactor::Reactor {
};
}
```

For Example 2, the generated code could look like this:

```
\\ Baz.hh
#include <reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh>

namespace Baz {
class Foo : public reactor::Reactor {
  // ...
};
}
```

```
\\ Bar.hh
#include <reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh>

#include "Baz.hh"

namespace Bar {
using Foo = Baz::Foo; // bring Foo in scope

class Bar : public reactor::Reactor {
  Foo foo;
  // ...
};
}
```

```
\\ Foo.hh
#include <reactor-cpp/reactor-cpp.hh>

#include "Bar.hh"

namespace Foo {
using Bar = Bar::Bar; // bring Bar in scope

class Foo : public reactor::Reactor {
  Bar bar;
  // ...
};
}
```

While this appears to be a promising solution, it is not sufficient to only
consider the name of an `*.lf` file to derive the namespace There could be two
files `Foo.lf` in different directories that both define the reactor `Foo`.
Thus, we also need to consider the directory structure and introduce
hierarchical namespaces. Consider this directory tree:

```
foo/
  bar/
    foo.lf  # defines reactor Foo
  baz/
    foo.lf  # defines reactor Foo
```

In this example, the two `Foo` reactors would have the fully qualified names
`foo.bar.foo.Foo` and `foo.baz.foo.Foo`. In order for this concept to work, we
need the notion of a top-level namespace or directory. Naturally, this would be
the package. Therefore, this namespace approach would also require a simple
mechanism to define a package. For now this could be rudimentary. Simply placing
an empty `lf.yaml` in the `foo/` directory in the above example would be
sufficient. In addition to the notion of packages, we would also need a simple
mechanism to find packages. However, since packages are something we want to
have anyway, it would not hurt to start and implement a rudimentary system now.

This proposal is a bit at odds with the file based import mechanism described
above. While it is clear what the namespace of an `*.lf` file relative to a
package directory is, it is unclear what the namespace of an arbitrary file
outside a package is. Marten suggested to resolve this by using a default
namespace or the global namespace whenever a \*lf that is not part of a package
is imported and to make the user responsible for avoiding any conflicts.

We would also need to restrict the naming of files and directories and ban the
usage of the namespace delimiter (`.` or `::` or some other) in file and
directory names. In my opinion this is not much of a problem and common practice
for many languages. If we decide to use this namespace mechanism, it would
probably be better to drop the file based imports and switch to imports by FQN
(e.g. `import Foo from foo.bar.foo`)

#### A Namespace Directive

As an alternative to the file based namespace mechanism described above, we
could also introduce a namespace directive in the LF syntax or as part of the
target properties. This would effectively allow the user to specify the
namespace that any reactor defined in a file should be part of. This solution
would allow to augment the file based import system that we have with a
namespace mechanism. It is important to note, however, that this entirely shifts
the responsibility for ensuring uniqueness within a namespace to the user. When
we derive namespaces from the file path as described above, we can be sure that
the resulting namespace only contains unique reactors because we ensure that any
LF file only contains unique reactors. If we allow the user to specify the
namespace, however, there could easily be two files with the same namespace
directive that both define the reactor `Foo`. This approach might also cause
problems for target languages where the namespaces relate to concrete file paths
such as in Rust, Python or Java.

### Name Mangling

There are other mechanisms to derive unique names apart from namespaces. One
that is widely used by compilers is name mangling which replaces or decorates
the original name. For instance, we could simply add a number to the name of
generated reactors (`Foo1`, `Foo2`, ...) to distinguish multiple LF reactor
definitions named `Foo`. What separates our approach from traditional compiler
though, is that we are not in control of the full build process and only
generate source code to be processed by another compiler. Therefore, any
renaming we do when compiling LF code to target code needs to be done with care
as it could easily introduce new problems because we are not aware of all the
identifiers defined in a target language. For instance if our LF program uses a
library that defines the class `Foo3`, adding a third definition of the reactor
Foo to the program would lead to an unexpected error that is also hard to debug.

Soroush also proposed to use a hashing mechanism (for instance a hash of the
file name) to decorate reactor names. This would be less likely to clash with
any names defined in some library. However, we would need to make sure that any
mechanism we use for generating unique decorated names follows strict rules and
generates reproducible names. This reproducibility is crucial for several
reasons.

1. Since even a complex name mangling mechanism has still the chance to produce
   name clashes with identifiers defined outside of the LF program, those
   clashes should not occur randomly. There should be either an error or no
   error on each compilation run. Nondeterministic builds are no fun to deal
   with.

2. In case of any errors, it is crucial to be able to reproduce and compare
   builds across machines and platforms. A platform dependent name mangling
   algorithm (for instance one that hashes file paths) would make it unnecessary
   hard to reproduce and debug compile errors.

3. Somewhere in the future, we might want to be able to compile packages as
   libraries. Recompilation of the library should never change its API.
   Moreover, the name mangling algorithm should be robust in the sense that
   small changes in LF code do not lead to changed identifiers in the library
   API.

All in all, I think it is hard to define an algorithm that generates
reproducible and stable names, but maybe someone else has a good idea of how
this could be achieved.

Another obvious disadvantage of the name mangling approach would be that the
generated code is less readable. Also any external target code that might want
to reference reactors in a library compiled from LF code, would need to know and
use the mangled name.

## Unique Reactor Names in our Tools

In our last meeting (Tue 2020-08-04), I said that there are other places where
we care about unique names: our tools such as the diagram view or the trace
generator that I implemented for C++ and that we cannot ensure that names are
unique at the moment. However, while thinking about it a bit more I realized
that this is not much of an issue. Ambiguous names of reactor types are not a
big problem for the diagram view. Since clicking on the nodes jumps directly to
the reactor definition, the ambiguity in the names can easily be resolved.

For the tracing, I realized that it is not the name of the reactor type that
matters, but the name of the instance. These are unique fully-qualified names
already. For instance `main.foo.bar.r0`, denotes the reaction with priority 0,
of a reactor instance called `bar` that is contained by the reactor instance
`foo`, which is in turn contained by the main reactor.

## Summary

All in all, I think leveraging the file structure for determining the fully
qualified names of reactors is the most promising solution.

1. It works without any changes in our syntax. Only the code generators need to
   be updated to support the namespacing.
2. In contrast to name mangling, it allows generation of readable code and also
   gives the programmer full control of how generated reactors are named.
3. It fits naturally to languages that also support leveraging the file
   structure to create namespaces (e.g. python or rust).
